Domains and Material Density
============================

Real micromagnetic problems are rarely a single uniform block. You usually
want a disk in vacuum, a stack of two materials, a multi-layer with an air
spacer, or a topology-optimized geometry where the "material vs. air"
question is itself the design variable. NeuralMag handles all of this
through a single concept — the **material density** ``state.rho`` — and a
small set of helpers built on top of it.

What ``rho`` is
---------------

``state.rho`` is a :class:`~neuralmag.CellFunction` that takes the value
``1.0`` inside the magnetic material and ``state.eps`` (machine epsilon)
outside. It is created automatically when you instantiate a
:class:`~neuralmag.State`:

.. code-block:: python

   # neuralmag/common/state.py
   self.rho = CellFunction(
       self, tensor=lambda domain: np.where(domain, 1.0, self.eps)
   )

So ``rho`` is a *dynamic attribute* of the state (see
:doc:`dynamic_attributes`): it depends on the boolean field
``state.domain``, which in turn depends on ``state.domains`` (the integer
domain-id field). You will normally not touch the lambda — you only
populate ``state.domains`` via :meth:`State.add_domain` and let the rest
follow.

.. admonition:: Why ``eps`` and not zero?
   :class: warning

   Several field terms divide by mass-lumped denominators that contain
   ``rho``. A density of exactly zero would produce ``inf`` / ``nan``
   instead of "no contribution from this cell". Use ``state.eps`` (or any
   other small positive number) for non-magnetic regions.

How ``rho`` enters the energy
-----------------------------

Every effective-field and energy form generated by the form compiler
multiplies its integrand by ``rho``. This is why you can write energy
expressions like

.. code-block:: python

   return A * dot(grad(m), grad(m)) * dV(dim)

without any explicit mask: cells with ``rho ≈ eps`` simply drop out of the
integral. The same trick is what makes :doc:`topology optimization
<dynamic_attributes>` differentiable — gradients with respect to ``rho``
flow through every field term automatically.

Interface densities (3D only)
-----------------------------

In 3D, the state additionally exposes three nodal density fields,

.. code-block:: python

   state.rhoxy   # ("ccn") density at xy-interfaces
   state.rhoxz   # ("cnc") density at xz-interfaces
   state.rhoyz   # ("ncc") density at yz-interfaces

These are generated automatically (see ``State._generate_code``) by taking
the *maximum* of the cell ``rho`` values on either side of each interface.
Surface-energy terms (e.g. interface DMI) integrate against them so that an
interface between a magnetic cell and an air cell still contributes, while
two-air interfaces vanish. You normally don't touch them by hand.

Defining regions with ``add_domain``
------------------------------------

:meth:`State.add_domain` assigns an integer ID to every cell satisfying a
boolean condition. Domain ``0`` is the implicit background; the first call
to :meth:`add_domain <State.add_domain>` zeroes out the default fill of
``1`` and starts marking cells.

.. code-block:: python

   # demos/skyrmion-disk.py
   x, y, z = state.coordinates()
   state.add_domain(1, x ** 2 + y ** 2 < 50e-9 ** 2)

After this call ``state.domains`` has value ``1`` inside the disk and
``0`` outside; ``state.rho`` automatically becomes ``1.0`` inside and
``state.eps`` outside.

You can layer several domains:

.. code-block:: python

   x, _, _ = state.coordinates()
   L0 = 30e-9
   state.add_domain(1, abs(x) <= L0)   # chiral region
   state.add_domain(2, abs(x) >  L0)   # ferromagnetic slabs

Re-adding a domain ID overwrites previously marked cells in those
locations, so the order of calls matters when conditions overlap.

Per-domain material parameters with ``fill_by_domain``
------------------------------------------------------

The most common reason to use multiple domains is to assign different
material parameters per region. :meth:`CellFunction.fill_by_domain` does
exactly this: it takes a list of values, one per domain ID (starting at
``0``), and stores a tiny lambda that indexes into that list using
``state.domains``.

.. code-block:: python

   import neuralmag as nm

   x, _, _ = state.coordinates()
   state.add_domain(1, abs(x) <= L0)   # chiral
   state.add_domain(2, abs(x) >  L0)   # ferro

   # values are indexed as [domain_0_background, domain_1_chiral, domain_2_ferro]
   state.material.Ms = nm.CellFunction(state).fill_by_domain([0.0, Ms, Ms])
   state.material.A  = nm.CellFunction(state).fill_by_domain([0.0, A,  A ])
   state.material.Db = nm.CellFunction(state).fill_by_domain([0.0, D,  0.0])
   state.material.Ku = nm.CellFunction(state).fill_by_domain([0.0, Kc, Ku])

Because ``fill_by_domain`` stores a *lambda* on the function, the values
re-index automatically if you ever update ``state.domains``. The function
is currently restricted to fully cell-based spaces (``"c" * dim``); attempts
to call it on a nodal function raise ``NotImplementedError``.

Topology-optimization pattern
-----------------------------

For a true topology-optimization problem you do not enumerate domains —
you make ``rho`` itself a function of an underlying continuous design
variable ``rho_m``:

.. code-block:: python

   # demos/topology-optimization_jax.py
   state.rho   = nm.CellFunction(
       state,
       tensor=lambda rho_m: rho_m.at[:, :, 10:].set(state.eps),
   )
   state.rho_m = nm.CellFunction(state).fill(1.0)

Here ``state.rho`` is overridden to (a) take the design variable ``rho_m``
as input and (b) force the upper layers to be air. From this point on,
:meth:`state.resolve("h_demag", ["rho_m"]) <State.resolve>` (see
:doc:`dynamic_attributes`) gives you a pure function of ``rho_m`` that you
can plug into ``jax.grad``.

.. admonition:: Gotchas
   :class: warning

   * Never set any cell's ``rho`` to *exactly* zero — use ``state.eps``.
   * ``fill_by_domain`` only works on fully cell-based functions.
   * Domain IDs must be non-negative integers; ID ``0`` is reserved for the
     background.
   * Re-adding the same ID overwrites earlier marks; if conditions overlap,
     the last call wins.
   * In 1D / 2D the interface densities ``rhoxy`` / ``rhoxz`` / ``rhoyz``
     do not exist — they are 3D-only by construction.

See also
--------

* :doc:`dynamic_attributes` — how the lambda-based ``rho`` is consumed by
  ``resolve`` in inverse-problem loops.
* :doc:`discretization` — where ``rho`` enters the form compiler's
  generated code.
