Introduction
============

NeuralMag is a differentiable micromagnetic simulator built around a
`SymPy <https://www.sympy.org/>`_ form compiler. It targets researchers who
want to solve *inverse* problems — topology optimization, parameter
identification, control problems — in addition to classical forward
simulations. The code base sits on top of either `PyTorch
<https://pytorch.org/>`_ or `JAX <https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_, so
every quantity that the form compiler produces is automatically differentiable
and runs on CPU or GPU without any code changes.

What you get
------------

* Nodal finite-difference discretization on a regular cuboid grid (the default).
* A cell-centred variant — FIC — that reuses exactly the same form compiler,
  handy whenever your design variables naturally live on cells
  (topology optimization, imaging-derived geometries, sharp material
  interfaces). See :doc:`discretization`.
* Symbolic energy functionals (exchange, demag, uni-/cubic anisotropy,
  interface and bulk DMI, interlayer exchange, external field) that are
  compiled to vectorized backend code at runtime.
* A differentiable Landau–Lifshitz–Gilbert integrator and a small set of
  loggers.
* Fully functional interface: everything that depends on the simulation state
  — material parameters, applied fields, even the geometry mask — can be a
  plain Python lambda of other state attributes, which makes gradients
  through optimization loops trivial.

Mental model
------------

A typical NeuralMag script wires together four kinds of objects::

   Mesh  ──▶  State  ──▶  FieldTerm.register(state)   ──▶  LLGSolver / Loggers
                                │
                                ▼
                           state.h_demag, state.h_exchange, …
                           state.E_demag, state.E_exchange, …

* **Mesh** — a regular cuboid grid: number of cells ``n``, spacing ``dx``,
  origin.
* **State** — the central container. It owns the mesh, the device and
  dtype, material parameters (``state.material.Ms``, …), the magnetization
  ``state.m``, and — via *dynamic attributes* — everything derived from them.
* **FieldTerm** subclasses (``ExchangeField``, ``DemagField``, …) each
  register two new dynamic attributes on the state: ``state.h_<name>`` for
  the effective field and ``state.E_<name>`` for the energy. You never touch
  the generated code yourself unless you write a new field term.
* **LLGSolver / Loggers** — consume the registered ``state.h_*`` attributes to
  integrate the LLG equation and record data.

If you come from a classical FD code, the biggest surprise is that
``state.material.Ms`` does not have to be a tensor: it can be a lambda that
depends on another state attribute. NeuralMag inspects the lambda's argument
names, walks the dependency graph lazily, and assembles the full computation
only when you actually read ``state.h_demag``. This is what makes
inverse-problem loops pleasant — see :doc:`dynamic_attributes`.

Two discretization modes, one form compiler
--------------------------------------------

The default scheme places the magnetization on the nodes of the grid (trilinear
Lagrange basis) while material parameters live on cells (piecewise constant).
The **FIC** variant keeps the same nodal finite-difference field computation but stores
``m`` on cells; a pair of mass-lumped projections moves data between nodes and
cells, generated by the same form compiler that handles every other term.
Both schemes are covered in :doc:`discretization`.

Backends and devices
--------------------

NeuralMag picks its backend and device from environment variables at import
time:

* ``NM_BACKEND`` — ``torch`` (default) or ``jax``.
* ``NM_DEVICE`` — ``cpu`` or ``cuda``.
* ``NM_DTYPE`` — ``float32`` or ``float64``.

For torch you can also override device / dtype per ``State`` via the
``device=`` and ``dtype=`` arguments. Switching backends at runtime is
supported as long as the new backend is installed — every ``FieldTerm``
re-compiles transparently on first use, with generated code cached under
``~/.cache/neuralmag``.

Who this guide is for
---------------------

We assume you are comfortable with Python / NumPy and have seen micromagnetic
simulations before. You do *not* need to know the internals of the form
compiler to use NeuralMag — reading :doc:`introduction`, :doc:`getting_started`
and :doc:`dynamic_attributes` is enough for most users. For background on the
physics and the nodal finite-difference discretization, see Abert
(2019) and Abert et al. (*npj Comput. Mater.* **11**, 193, 2025).
